---
title: "Plot Summary: The Spanish Curate"
order: 14
---
<p><span>by Maria Isabel Maza</span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-a95c7d30-d4e6-21c7-8f13-a2301b78ee42"><span>Act 1, Scene 1</span><br/></h2>
<p><span><b>A Street in Cordoba.</b> Two gentlemen friends, Milanes and Arsenio, discuss Leandro’s father’s funeral. They are joined by two more gentlemen, Jamie and Leandro, and proceed to compliment Ascanio. They admire his personality and manners despite his non-noble status of birth. While they complement him, Ascanio enters and, after complimenting him, Milanes, Leandro, and Jamie give him money to better his financial situation. Henrique, Jamie’s older brother, enters and argues with Jamie about his inheritance, while Jamie’s friends caution him to stay calm. Jamie ignores them, insulting Henrique, who then leaves. Jamie then tells his friends of Amaranta’s beauty which causes Leandro to wish to see her himself. However, Bartolus, Amaranta’s husband, is jealous and often keeps her indoors. Leandro begins to plan how to meet her while his friends mock him.  </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-91aab920-9d12-956a-a681-71fcdd849e8a"><span>Act 1, Scene 2</span><br/></h2>
<p><span><b>Octavio and Jacinta’s Home.</b> Octavio and Jacinta, Ascanio’s parents, contemplate a failed attempt to find compassion in Henrique after asking him for a favor. Ascanio enters and presents money his friends gave him in Scene 1. Jacinta is touched by Ascanio’s treatment of her and Octavio and begins to cry. Ascanio comforts Octavio and Jacinta and they exit planning a feast to celebrate their family.</span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-4089d547-787e-49a7-891f-bfcf53d50da4"><span>Act 1, Scene 3</span><br/></h2>
<p><span><b>Henrique and Violante’s Home.</b> Henrique and his wife, Violate, lament their lack of heirs. Violante gives Henrique the go-ahead to do whatever is necessary to prevent Jamie from inheriting their fortune. Henrique warns Violante that she may be displeased by his actions, but Violante ignores his warning.</span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-bd9ce6bd-b53b-8c61-c93e-d177d6c0686d"><span>Act 2, Scene 1</span><br/></h2>
<p><span><b>A Street in Cordoba.</b> Leandro briefly talks over his plan to meet Amaranta with Milanes and Arsenio and promises to keep them updated as he initiates the first stage of his plan. Disguised, he listens to a conversation between Lopez and Diego, the local curate and sexton. He then introduces himself as a student wanting to study law and, through some deception and money, convinces Lopez and Diego to take him to Bartolus, Amaranta’s husband. </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-cad718b4-d321-6d16-dd3a-5c14050e3d5b"><span>Act 2, Scene 2</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>On the other island, a group of women are hunting deer. We learn of the young Clarinda (who has never seen a man before), her mother Rosella (who rules this commonwealth of women), and Crocale, Hippolita, and Juletta (who relish their freedom and pine for sexual contact with men). Crocale relates a dream about a young man coming to her bed. When Albert washes up on shore, he mistakes the women for goddesses and begs for their help before fainting. Clarinda examines Albert's unconscious body and, after puzzling over him, realizes that he is a man. She is attracted to him and begins to feel jealous when she sees another woman's hair bandaging his wounds. Rosella discovers Albert among the women and upbraids them for entertaining him. She reminds them that part of their mutual agreement in forming a commonwealth was the abjure the company of men. She also notes that they learned to live as Amazons from a group of indigenous women who once inhabited the island. However, after listening to the women's demands, she consents to a sexual exchange of one month with the men on the other island. Anxious about Clarinda's interest in him, Albert lies and says that the stranded Aminta is his sister, begging for a quick return to her. </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-b8c1a6ab-63b8-d8ae-3394-8658b13e80d8"><span>Act 3, Scene 1</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>Meanwhile, Franville, Lamure, and Morillat try to make meals out of mud and beg the Surgeon for medicinal scraps to eat. When Aminta enters and falls asleep from hunger and exhaustion, the men scheme over how best to cannibalize her. Tibalt  to save Aminta from the greedy gentlemen, and suddenly Albert returns with food and news of the Amazons. Albert asks Aminta to play along with the story that she is his sister. The Amazons offer their help and sexual services on two conditions: (1) that the men ask nothing of their pasts; and (2) that the men surrender their weapons. Tibalt then assesses each man’s humor to match him with the most compatible woman. The men decide to use the treasure they received from Sebastian and Nicusa to woo the Amazons. The sight of the treasure triggers a violent outburst when the women realize that it is their own lost treasure. Rosella assumes that the men killed Sebastian (her husband) and stole the treasure from him. Clarinda saves the men's lives by arguing that killing the men would be a mercy and that they should rather suffer in captivity. </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-3f4cc879-7c40-8047-8760-68a343cc3c36"><span>Act 4, Scene 1</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>Having been rescued by the sudden and timely appearance of Raymond (Aminta’s brother) and his sailors, Sebastian and Nicusa return with Raymond to the barren island in search of the people and treasure they left behind, but there is no trace of the Frenchmen. Raymond gives them four days’ worth of food and says if the men can't be found in that time, Sebastian and Nicusa will be left to starve.  </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-dc18454a-2220-b728-ffc5-aac5fe0374b7"><span>Act 4, Scene 2</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>Rosella plans the ritual execution of the Frenchmen on the anniversary of her marriage to Sebastian. Clarinda, Crocale, Hippolita, and Juletta discuss the various merits and faults of their captive men. Clarinda tries to comfort Aminta by declaring her love and mercy for Albert and asks Aminta to woo Albert on her behalf. Aminta visits Albert in his cell and tells him that he must love Clarinda. Albert wonders how Aminta could entreat him to do this and suspects her of loving someone else. At last, they decide to live for the moment and love each other for as long as they can keep it a secret. </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-ee365add-5a5a-0b5a-e496-3a3dc544380b"><span>Act 4, Scene 3</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>Tibalt and the Master say they'd rather be sent out to pasture than satisfy the Crocale and Juletta sexually. By contrast, Franville, Lamure, and Morillat offer their sexual services to Juletta and Clarinda in exchange for food. They then attempt to barter with the news that Aminta is Albert’s mistress, not his sister. Enraged, Clarinda vows revenge and storms off. </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-9b04eba6-629d-a75d-c7a7-db4ea99220a2"><span>Act 4, Scene 4</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>Clarinda discovers Aminta and Albert embracing and bids the other women bind Aminta to a tree. Raymond suddenly arrives and recognizes his sister Aminta, but his failure to take arms against the women leads to his capture too. </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-86176e36-b7ef-aa41-fd08-c208dfbd3a46"><span>Act 5, Scene 1</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>Rosella instructs the other women to eavesdrop on the Frenchmen to confirm the details of their guilt and whether Raymond is in league with them.  </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-31814fa7-cf53-4310-62bf-869f67e4c7bb"><span>Act 5, Scene 2</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>The women set out a feast of food and drink to lure the Frenchmen into revealing their pasts while Crocale eavesdrops. Tibalt quickly falls to drinking copious amounts of wine. Raymond is reunited with Aminta and Albert, and Albert seeks forgiveness from Raymond for having abducted Aminta. Crocale overhears these partial histories and bursts onto the scene when she's heard enough to suspect that the men Raymond says he encountered may be her long-lost Portuguese kinsmen. Last on stage, a very drunk Tibalt flirts with Crocale. </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-f445df3f-3ae4-b0a0-4bba-77c457766d58"><span>Act 5, Scene 3</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>Sebastian and Nicusa spy an approaching ship helmed by Crocale coming to bring them to the fertile island. </span><br/></p>
<h2 id="header-4cba7ce9-0f67-3909-a754-9bce8a177769"><span>Act 5, Scene 4</span><br/></h2>
<p><span>Still determined to follow through with the ritual sacrifice, Rosella stands before an altar and explains the Amazons’ true history as stranded Portuguese women. Crocale interrupts to reunite Sebastian and Rosella, who are long-lost husband and wife. Rosella abdicates her power, and Sebastian unequivocally takes charge of the party, betrothing his daughter Clarinda to Raymond and confirming the love of Aminta and Albert. Tibalt still swoons for Crocale. Happy all, they announce plans to return home. </span></p>
<p></p>
